---
date: 2023-11-11
layout: post
title: Picard Groups & Grothendieck Groups
subtitle: 
description: 
image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/XiaoruiYIN/gtiobnsimg/main/img/sbn1102.jpg
optimized_image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/XiaoruiYIN/gtiobnsimg/main/img/sbn1102.jpg
category: Mathematics
tags:
  - Mathematics
  - BNS
author: X.YIN
math: true
---

> 从本文开始打算用几篇文章的时间概括Neukirch代数数论书的第三章在干什么.

> f.g. = finitely generated; CRI = commutative ring with 1; $M^\vee$ = dual module of $M$; $\mathcal{O}$ = Dedekind domain; $K=\mathrm{Quot}(\mathcal{O})$; $S\subset R$ = multiplicative subset of $R$.

## 1. Picard Groups

**Lemma.** $R$ CRI, $R$-module $M\neq 0$. les PSSE
i) $M$ f.g. projective of rank $1$;
ii) $M^\vee\otimes
_
RM\simeq R$;
iii) there exists an $R$-module $N$ s.t. $N\otimes
_
RM\simeq R.$
A $R$-module satisfying one of these conditions is said to be invertible.


> Recall. commutative ring extension $B/A$, $M, N$ $A$-module, then we have a canonical isomorphism 
$$M\otimes
_
AN\otimes
_
AB=(M\otimes
_
AB)\otimes
_
B(N\otimes
_
AB).$$

> Recall. $R$ CRI. Then $S^{-1}R$ is flat for all $S$.

> **Proof.** i) $\Rightarrow$ ii) For any prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$ we apply the functor $R
_
\mathfrak{p}\otimes
_
R-$ over $f:M^\vee\otimes
_
RM\to R, \alpha\otimes m\mapsto \alpha(m),$ and we may obtain a homomorphism
$f
_
\mathfrak{p}:M
_
\mathfrak{p}^\vee\otimes
_
{R
_
\mathfrak{p}}M
_
\mathfrak{p}\to R
_
\mathfrak{p}$. Since $\mathrm{rk}(M
_
\mathfrak{p}^\vee\otimes
_
{R
_
\mathfrak{p}}M
_
\mathfrak{p})=\mathrm{rk}(M
_
\mathfrak{p}^\vee)\mathrm{rk}(M
_
\mathfrak{p})=1$ and $R
_
\mathfrak{p}\otimes
_
R-$ preserves cokernels and kernels(flat),

$f$ surjective $\Rightarrow$ $f
_
\mathfrak{p}$ surjective $\Rightarrow$ $f
_
\mathfrak{p}$ injective $\Rightarrow$ $f$ injective. 

> ii) $\Rightarrow$ iii) Trivial.

> iii) $\Rightarrow$ i) Suppose that $\varphi:N\otimes
_
RM\to R$ and $\psi:R\to N\otimes
_
RM$ with $\psi\circ\varphi=\varphi\psi=\mathrm{id}$, and $\psi(1)=\sum
_
{i=1}^rn
_
i\otimes m
_
i.$ Denote $\beta
_
i:m\mapsto\varphi(n
_
i\otimes m)\in M^\vee.$ Then
$\iota:M\to R^\oplus r, m\mapsto (\beta
_
i(m))
_
{1\leq i\leq r}$ and $\pi:R^\oplus r \to M$, $(r
_
i)
_
{1\leq i\leq r}\mapsto\sum
_
{i=1}^rr
_
i\alpha^{-1}(m
_
i)$, where $\alpha$ is the automorphism maps $m$ to $m\sum
_
{i=1}^r\beta
_
i(m)m
_
i.$ Therefore $M$ is f.g. proj. as $\pi\circ\iota=\mathrm{id}
_
M.$

For all $\mathfrak{p}\in\mathrm{Spec}R,$ $\mathrm{rk}
_
{R
_
\mathfrak{p}}(N\otimes
_
R
M
_
\mathfrak{p})=\mathrm{rk}(R
_
\mathfrak{p})=1$, hence $\mathrm{rk}(M
_
\mathfrak{p})=1$ i.e. $M$ is of constant rank $1$.

**Def.** The Picard group of a CRI $\mathrm{Pic}(R)$ is the equiv. classes of invertible $R-$Modules equipped with $\otimes
_
R.$

**Lemma.** $R$ domain;

a)invertible fractional ideal = f.g. proj. $R$-Mod.

b)invertible f.g. proj. $R$-Mod = can be embedded in $\mathrm{Quot}(R)$. 
$\square$

> In this proof we may use the fact $\rho
_
M$ is continuous which we may define in the second section.

**Prop.** $\mathrm{Pic}(\mathcal{O})=Cl
_
K.$
$\square$



## 2. Grothendiect Groups

**Def.** Let $R$ be a commutative ring, $\mathcal{F}
_
0$ (resp.$\mathcal{F}^0$) denotes the free abelian group generated by all iso. classes of f.g. proj. (resp. coherent) $R$-Mod, $\mathcal{R}
_
0$ (resp.$\mathcal{R}^0$) its subgroup generated by elements of the form $M+M\oplus N-N.$ The Grothendieck groups of $R$ are defined by 
$K
_
0(R)=\mathcal{F}
_
0/\mathcal{R}
_
0$ and $K^0(R)=\mathcal{F}^0/\mathcal{R}^0.$ 
The groups equipped with $\otimes
_
R$ become CRI.

We denote the class of $M$ in $K
_
0(R)$ by $[M]$. Its easy to see that $[P]=[Q]$ iff there exists some $n\in\mathbb{N}$ such that $P\otimes R^{\otimes n}\simeq Q\otimes R^{\otimes n}.$

> This definition makes sense when $R$ is not commucative but there will not be a ring structure.

A ring extension $\varphi:R\to S$ induces a morphism $K
_
0(R)\to K
_
0(S), [M]\mapsto [S\otimes
_
RM].$

Consider the ring $C=\mathcal{C}(\mathrm{Spec}(R),\mathbb{Z})$ where $\mathbb{Z}$ is discrete. $\mathrm{Spec}(R)$ is quasi-compact $\Rightarrow$ for all $f\in C$ the image of $f$ is a finite set $(n
_
i)
_
{1\leq i\leq r}$ $\Rightarrow$ $f^{-1}(\mathbb{Z})$ is open and closed in $\mathrm{Spec}(R)$ $\Rightarrow$ there exists $(e
_
i)
_
{1\leq i\leq r}\subset R,$ $e
_
i^2=e
_
i$ s.t. $f^{-1}(n
_
i)=D(Re
_
i)=\mathrm{Spec}(R)\backslash V(Re
_
i).$

**Prop.** $\theta: C\mapsto K
_
0(R), f \mapsto \sum
_
{i=1}^rn
_
i[Re
_
i]$ defines a homomorphism of rings.



**Prop.** $M$ be a f.g. proj. $R$-mod. Then $\rho
_
M:\mathrm{Spec}(R)\mapsto \mathbb{Z}, \mathfrak{p}\mapsto \mathrm{rk}(M
_
\mathfrak{p})$ is continuous.

> **Lemma.** $V(\mathrm{Ann}M)=\mathrm{Supp}(M).$

**Proof.** Choose a f.g. proj. $R$-mod $N$ s.t. $M\oplus N\simeq R^{\oplus n},$ then $\rho
_
M+\rho
_N=n.$ Hence for any $x\in\mathbb{Z}$, $\rho
_
M^{-1}(m)$ $=\{\mathfrak{p}:\mathrm{rk}\mathfrak{p}M
_
\mathfrak{p}=m\}$ $=\{\mathfrak{p}:\mathrm{rk}\mathfrak{p}M
_
\mathfrak{p}\leq m\}\cap\{\mathfrak{p}:\mathrm{rk}\mathfrak{p}M
_
\mathfrak{p}\geq m\}$ $=\{\mathfrak{p}:\mathrm{rk}\mathfrak{p}M
_
\mathfrak{p}\leq m\}\cap\{\mathfrak{p}:\mathrm{rk}\mathfrak{p}N
_
\mathfrak{p}\leq n-m\}$ $=\{\mathfrak{p}:\wedge^{m+1}(M)\otimes R
_
\mathfrak{p}=0\}\cap\{\mathfrak{p}:\wedge^{n-m+1}(N)\otimes R
_
\mathfrak{p}=0\}$ $=D(\mathrm{Ann}(\wedge^{m+1}(M)\))\cap D(\mathrm{Ann}(\wedge^{n-m+1}(N)))$ is open.

**Prop.** $\rho:K
_0(R)\mapsto C,[M]\mapsto \rho
_
M$ is a hom. or rings satisfying $\rho\circ\theta=\mathrm{id}
_
C.$

**Cor.** $K
_
0(R)\simeq\mathrm{ker}\rho\oplus C.$

Denote the inclusion $j:\mathrm{ker}\rho\to K
_
0(R)$ and $p:K
_
0(R)\to\mathrm{ker}\rho, [M]\mapsto [M]-\theta(\rho
_
M),$ then $p\circ j= \mathrm{id}
_
{\mathrm{ker}\rho}.$

**Prop.** $\iota: \mathrm{Pic}(R)\to \mathrm{ker}\rho, M\mapsto [M]-[R]$ and
$\lambda: \mathrm{ker}\rho\to\mathrm{Pic}(R) , M\mapsto [M]-[R^m]\mapsto \wedge^mM$. $\lambda$ is a homomorphism of groups satisfying $\lambda\circ\iota=\mathrm{id}
_
{Pic(R)}.$

**Def.** $\mathrm{det}=\lambda\circ p:K
_
0(R)\to\mathrm{Pic}(R).$

> If we assume that $R$ is a domain then $\mathrm{det}(M)=\wedge^{\mathrm{rk}M}M$, and we have a canonical morphism $\mathrm{det}(M)\otimes
_
{\mathcal{O}}\mathrm{det}(N)=\mathrm{det}(M\oplus N).$

> When $R$ is a Dedekind domain $\iota$ becomes a homomorphism.

**Lemma.** All f.g. proj. $\mathcal{O}-$mod is a direct sum of some invertible $\mathcal{O}-$mod. $\square$

**Theorem.** $\iota:\mathrm{Pic}(\mathcal{O})\to \mathrm{ker}\rho$ is an isomorphosm and 

$K
_
0(\mathcal{O})\simeq\mathbb{Z}\oplus\mathrm{Pic}(\mathrm{O})\simeq\mathbb{Z}\oplus Cl
_
K.$


我觉得这个书写的有点对我老百姓这样水平不高的人不友好,作者在蛮多其实不是特别容易的地方以“显然”一词的等价表述省略了很有内容的东西,
念完像A&M这样的袋鼠教材还是要有很多gap.比如本文的全部内容事实上被他在没有说明的情况下默认为前置知识.
为了读这个最近也翻了很多次stacks project和bourbaki的交换袋鼠(主要是为了看projective module).前辈们能建设出来这样宏大的工程真是令人崇敬.

顺着本主题接下去的内容是考虑把无穷素点的信息放进来的所谓replete primes, 我们将会看到这其中有限的部分就是一个分式理想以及无限的部分给出了一个度量的结构.
于是我们之后的一个任务是利用所谓metrized module把以上关于普通的环的Picard群和Grothendieck群搞成replete的版本,并且检查它们和度量结构的相容性.

另外关于different和discriminant的内容我先前发出来的也有一些但很不完备,手写的笔记又很混乱,准备找时间重写一个.

之前想写写我对巴黎的城市布局的评价,有很多想法但到现在还最终没有形成文章(尽管很大程度上是因为我懒).也写了第二个月的生存报告但想来想去不打算发.

全文耗时约2.5小时.本次的内容就到这里,我们下次再见.
