---
date: 2024-04-01
layout: post
title: BNSNote019 Group Cohomology
subtitle: CFT02
description: 
image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/XiaoruiYIN/gtiobnsimg/main/img/bns019cover.jpg
optimized_image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/XiaoruiYIN/gtiobnsimg/main/img/bns019cover.jpg
category: Mathematics
tags:
  - Mathematics
  - BNS
author: YXR
math: true
---

这些其实是上次更新的时候就写好的, 本来想着写完后再发结果最后一直没想补写这个, 感觉也没什么接着写的必要, 就姑且这样吧.

# 2. Group Cohomology

## Cohomology

**Def.** Let $G$ be a group. An abelian group $A$ on which $G$ acts linearly is said to be a (left) $G$-module. A morphism between $G$-modules $A\to B$ is a morphism of group such that the following diagram commutes for all $g\in G.$

<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJBIl0sWzEsMCwiQiJdLFswLDEsIkEiXSxbMSwxLCJCIl0sWzAsMSwiZiJdLFsyLDMsImYiXSxbMCwyLCJnIl0sWzEsMywiZyJdXQ==\&embed" width="304" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;">\</iframe>


We may always suppose that $G$ acts trivially on $\mathbb{Z}.$

**Lemma2.1.** $G\textbf{-Mod}=\mathbb{Z}[G]\textbf{-Mod}$.

**Proof.** Omitted. $\square$

Denote $A^G$ the subgroup of $A$ consisting of the elements that is invariant under the $G$-action.


**Lemma2.2.** The $G\textbf{-Mod}\to\textbf{Ab}$ covariant functor $F: A\mapsto A^G$ is left exact.

**Proof.** $\square$

**Def.** $H^q(G,A):=R^qF(A)$ (Appendix E).

**Prop2.3.** i) $H^0(G,A)=A^G;$

ii) Any exact sequence $0\to A\to B\to C\to 0$ induces a long exact sequence of cohomology groups by some natural connecting homomorphisms $H^q(G,C)\to H^{q+1}(G,A).$

**Proof.** LemmaE.6. $\square$


Note that $A^G=\mathrm{Hom}\_G(\mathbb{Z},A),$ we have $H^q(G,A)=\mathrm{Ext}\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}^q(\mathbb{Z},A),$ which can also be viewed as the derived functor of $\mathrm{Hom}\_G(-,A).$ This allow us to compute $H^q(G,A)$ by constructing a projective resolution of $\mathbb{Z}$.


Put $E\_i=\{ (g\_0,g\_1,...,g\_i)\| g\_j\in G\}$ and $L\_i$ the free abelian group generated by $E\_i.$ $G$ acts on $E\_i$ by translation $g(g\_0,g\_1,...,g\_i)=(gg\_0,gg\_1,...,gg\_i),$ which turns $L\_i$ into free $\mathbb{Z}[G]$-modules. Consider the boundary map defined by

$d(g\_0,g\_1,...,g\_i)=\sum\_{1\leq j\leq i}(-1)^j (\hat{g}\_j)$ (the index $j$ is omitted). It is clearly a $G$-morphism.

**Lemma2.4.** $...\to L\_2\to L\_1\to L\_0\to\mathbb{Z}\to 0$ is a $\mathbb{Z}[G]$-free resolution of $\mathbb{Z}.$

**Proof.** Consider the morphism of abelian groups $u:(g\_0,g\_1,...,g\_i)\mapsto (1,g\_0,g\_1,...,g\_i).$ On can check easily that $u\circ d+d\circ u=-\mathrm{id}.$ $\square$

Now apply $\mathrm{Hom}\_G(-, A)$ to the sequence. Denote $K^i=\mathrm{Hom}\_G(L\_i, A).$ As $gf((g\_0,...,g\_i))=f((gg\_1,...,gg\_i)),$ $f$ is uniquely determined by its value $f((1,g\_1,g\_1g\_2,...,g\_1g\_2...g\_i)).$ In this sense we omit the first variable of $f$ (hence a map $G^i\to A$) and we get:

**Prop2.5.** The cohomology groups $H^q(G,A)$ are the cohomology groups of the complex $K^0\to K^1\to K^2\to...$

The coboundary map is defined by $d:K^i\to K^{i+1},$ %$$

$$d(f)(g_1,g_2,...,g_{i+1})=g_1f((g_2,...,g_{i+1}))+\sum_{j=1}^if((g_1,...g_{j-1},g_jg_{j+1},...,g_{i+1}))+(-1)^{i+1}f(g_1,...,g_i).$$

**Corollary2.6.** $H^q(G,A)$ is finite if both $G$ and $A$ are finite.

**Example.** $A=K^0\to K^1:$ $d(a)(g)=ga-a;$ 

$K^1\to K^2:$ $d(f)(g,h)=gf(h)-g(gh)+f(g);$

$K^2\to K^3:$ $d(f)(g,h,k)=gf(h,k)-f(gh,k)+f(g,hk)-f(g,h).$

**Def.** A $G$-module $A$ is said to be induced(resp. coinduced) if it is isomorphic to $\mathbb{Z}[G]\otimes\_\mathbb{Z} A\_0$ (resp. $\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(\mathbb{Z}[G],A\_0)$ ) for some $A\_0$. $A$ is said to be relatively projective(resp. injective) if it is a direct factor of some induced(resp. coinduced) module.

**Prop2.7.** Suppose that $A$ is relatively injective as $G$-module, then $H^q(G,A)=0$ for all $q\geq 1.$

**Proof.** By the addictivity of $\mathrm{Hom}\_G(\mathbb{Z},-)$ we have $H^q(G,A\oplus B)=H^q(G,A)\oplus H^q(G,B),$ so we may assume that $A=\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(\mathbb{Z}[G],X),$ then $K^i=\mathrm{Hom}\_G(L\_i,\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(\mathbb{Z}[G],X))=\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(L\_i,X).$ The cohomology groups are $\mathrm{Ext}\_{\mathbb{Z}}^q(\mathbb{Z},X)=0.$ $\square$

**Prop2.8.(Dimension Shifting)** In a $\mathbb{Z}[G]\textbf{-Mod}$ exact sequence

$0\to A\to B\to C\to 0$

if $B$ is relatively injective (for example, coinduced), then for all $q\geq 1$ we have

$H^q(G,C)=H^{q+1}(G,A).$

**Proof.** Prop2.3(ii) + Prop2.7. $\square$

**Corollary2.9.(Uniqueness of Cohomology)** Fix a group $G$. Suppose $(F^q)\_{q\geq 0}$ is a family of functors $\mathbb{Z}[G]\textbf{-Mod}\to\textbf{Ab}$ satisfying:

i) $F^0(A)=A^G$ for any $\mathbb{Z}[G]$-module $A$;

ii) Any exact sequence of $\mathbb{Z}[G]$-module $0\to A\to B\to C\to 0$ induces a long exact sequence $...\to F^qC\to F^{q+1}A\to ...$

iii) $F^q(A)=0$ for all $q\geq 1$ if $A$ is coinduced;

Then for any $\mathbb{Z}[G]$-module $A$, $F^q(A)=H^q(G,A)$.

**Proof**. Induction on $q$. Suppose that for any $\mathbb{Z}[G]$-module $A$, $F^q(A)=H^q(G,A)$. Put $B=\mathrm{Hom}\_{\mathbb{Z}}(\mathbb{Z}[G],A)$, then $B$ is coinduced and $A=\mathrm{Hom}\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}(\mathbb{Z}[G],A)\subset B$. Put $C=B/A$ and apply dimension shifting we get $H^q{G,C}=F^q(C)=F^{q+1}(A)=H^{q+1}(G,A).$ $\square$


## Homology

**Remark.** For left $\mathbb{Z}[G]$-modules $A$ and $B$, in their tensor product $B\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]} A$(an abelian group) we consider $B$ as a right module via $bg=g^{-1}b.$

**Def.** $H\_q(G,A):=\mathrm{Tor}\_n^{\mathbb{Z}[G]}(\mathbb{Z},A).$

**Def.** Augmentation: $\mathbb{Z}[G]\to \mathbb{Z}, \sum\_{g\in G}n\_gg\mapsto \sum\_{g\in G}n\_g.$ The kernel of this map $I\_G$ is called the augmentation ideal.

Note that $I\_GA=\mathrm{ker}(K^0\to K^1)$ (it is generated by$(ga-a)\_{a\in A,g\in G}$).

**Lemma2.9** $A/I\_GA=\mathbb{Z}\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}A.$

**Proof.** The map $A\to\mathbb{Z}\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}A, a\mapsto 1\otimes a$ induced a map $A/I\_GA\to\mathbb{Z}\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}A.$ Its inverse is given by $Z\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}A\to A/I\_GA, (n,a)\mapsto na+I\_GA.$ $\square$

If $G$ is **finite** we can compute its homology by chains. By Lemma2.4, we must compute the homology groups of the complex

$...\to L\_2\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}A\to L\_1\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}A\to L\_0\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}A.$

Recall that an element of $L\_i$ is a function $G^i\to\mathbb{Z}$ of finite support, an element of $L\_i\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}A$ can be viewed as a function $G^i\to A$ of finite support. For $f\in L\_{i+1}\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}A$ we define $d(f)\in L\_{i}\otimes\_{\mathbb{Z}[G]}A$ to be the function that maps $(g\_1,...,g\_{i})$ to %$$

$$\sum_{g\in G}g^{-1}f(g,g_1,...,g_i) \\+ \sum_{j=1}^{i}(-1)^j \sum_{g\in G}f(g_1,...,g_{j-1},g_jg,g^{-1},g_{j+1},..,g_i)\\+(-1)^{i+1}\sum_{g\in G}f(g_1,...,g_i,g).$$

**Prop.** Dimension shifting, uniqueness of homology(similar to 2.7&2.8).



## Change of Groups

Let $A$ be a $G$-module and $f:G^\prime\to G$ be a morphism of group, $A$ is considered to be a $G^\prime$-module via $g^\prime a:=f(g^\prime)a.$ $f$ induces (with $\mathrm{Ext}(-,A)$ ) a map between cohomology groups $H^q(G,A)\to H^q(G^\prime,A).$

Let $A^\prime$ be a $G^\prime$-module, and $u:A\to A^\prime$ a morphism of abelian group such that the following diagram was commutative.

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJBIl0sWzEsMCwiQV5cXHByaW1lIl0sWzEsMSwiQV5cXHByaW1lIl0sWzAsMSwiQSJdLFszLDAsImYoZykiLDJdLFsyLDEsImciLDJdLFswLDEsInUiXSxbMywyLCJ1Il1d -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJBIl0sWzEsMCwiQV5cXHByaW1lIl0sWzEsMSwiQV5cXHByaW1lIl0sWzAsMSwiQSJdLFszLDAsImYoZykiLDJdLFsyLDEsImciLDJdLFswLDEsInUiXSxbMywyLCJ1Il1d&embed" width="304" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>


Then $u$ is a $G^\prime$-morphism, so it induces a map $H^q(G^\prime,A)\to H^q(G^\prime,A^\prime)$ (depends on $f$). Compose it with the map $H^q(G,A)\to H^q(G^\prime,A)$, and we get a map $H^q(G,A)\to H^q(G^\prime,A^\prime).$

### $\mathrm{Ind}\_G^H(A)$

**Def.** Suppose that $H$ is a subgroup of $G$ and that $A$ is an $H$-module, we denote $\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(A)$ the $G$-module consisting of functions $f:G\to A$ satisfying $f(hg)=hf(g)$ for all $h\in H,$ with the $G$ action $g(f):\gamma\mapsto f(\gamma g).$ (Recall: induced representation)


**Lemma2.10.** $\mathrm{Hom}\_H(-,A)=\mathrm{Hom}\_G(-,\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(A)).$

**Proof.** For any $G$-module $B$ consider the map 

$\Phi:\mathrm{Hom}\_H(B,A)=\mathrm{Hom}\_G(B,\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(A)),f\mapsto (b\mapsto (\gamma\mapsto f(\gamma b))).$

One can check that the following diagrams are well defined and commute, and the result follows.

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsOCxbMCwwLCJCIl0sWzEsMCwiQSJdLFswLDEsIkIiXSxbMSwxLCJBIl0sWzIsMCwiQiJdLFszLDAsIlxcbWF0aHJte0luZH1fR15IKEEpIl0sWzMsMSwiXFxtYXRocm17SW5kfV9HXkgoQSkiXSxbMiwxLCJCIl0sWzIsMywiZiJdLFswLDEsImYiXSxbMiwwLCJoIiwyXSxbMywxLCJoIiwyXSxbNyw0LCJnIiwyXSxbNiw1LCJnIiwyXSxbNCw1LCJcXFBoaShmKSJdLFs3LDYsIlxcUGhpKGYpIl1d -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsOCxbMCwwLCJCIl0sWzEsMCwiQSJdLFswLDEsIkIiXSxbMSwxLCJBIl0sWzIsMCwiQiJdLFszLDAsIlxcbWF0aHJte0luZH1fR15IKEEpIl0sWzMsMSwiXFxtYXRocm17SW5kfV9HXkgoQSkiXSxbMiwxLCJCIl0sWzIsMywiZiJdLFswLDEsImYiXSxbMiwwLCJoIiwyXSxbMywxLCJoIiwyXSxbNyw0LCJnIiwyXSxbNiw1LCJnIiwyXSxbNCw1LCJcXFBoaShmKSJdLFs3LDYsIlxcUGhpKGYpIl1d&embed" width="611" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>


$\square$


**Lemma2.11.** $\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(-):H\textbf{-Mod}\to G\textbf{-Mod}$ is exact.

**Proof.** $\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(-)=\mathrm{Hom}\_H(\mathbb{Z}(G),-).$ $\mathbb{Z}[G]$ is a free $\mathbb{Z}[H]$-module with a basis given by a representation system of $G/H.$ $\square$


**Prop2.12.(Shapiro's Lemma)** Suppose that $H$ is a subgroup of $G$ and that $A$ is an $H$-module. The map $\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(A)\to A,f\mapsto f(1\_G)$ induces an isomorphism

$H^q(G,\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(A))\to H^q(H,A).$

**Proof.** We take an $H$-injective resolution $I\_\bullet\to A\to 0$ of $A$, then $H^q(H,A)$ is the cohomology group of $\mathrm{Hom}\_H(\mathbb{Z},I\_\bullet)\to \mathrm{Hom}\_H(\mathbb{Z},A).$ 

We apply $\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(-)$ to $I\_\bullet\to A\to 0$. By Lemma2.10 we have 

$$\mathrm{Hom}_H(\mathbb{Z},A)=\mathrm{Hom}_G(\mathbb{Z},\mathrm{Ind}_H^G(A))$$

hence $\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(-)$
<a href="https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/injective+object#preservation\_of\_injective\_objects" style="color: blue"> preserves injectives</a>, 
and $\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(I\_\bullet)\to\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(A)\to 0$ is an injective resolution of $\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(A).$ The cohomology groups $H^q(G,\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(A))$ are computed by the complex

$\mathrm{Hom}\_G(\mathbb{Z},\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(I\_\bullet))\to\mathrm{Hom}\_G(\mathbb{Z},\mathrm{Ind}\_H^G(A))\to 0$ 

which is the same as $H^q(H,A)$ by Lemma2.10. $\square$ %$$


### $\mathrm{Res, Inf}$

**Def.** For group $G$, its subgroup $H$ and a $G$-module $A$, we define the restriction to be the morphism induced by the inclusion $H\to G:$
$$\mathrm{Res}:H^q(G,A)\to H^q(H,A).$$

If $H$ is normal, we can define the inflation
$$\mathrm{Inf}:H^q(G/H,A^H)\to H^q(G,A).$$


**Remark.** We admit the fact that these maps commutes with the boudary maps and the connection maps (they can be defined in a similar way as we define the corestriction later of this section).

**Theorem2.13.(Inf-Res)** For group $G$, its normal subgroup $H$ and $G$-module $A$, 

1) The following sequence is exact:

$0\to H^1(G/H,A^H)\xrightarrow{\mathrm{Inf}}H^1(G,A)\xrightarrow{\mathrm{Res}}H^1(H,A).$

2) If $H^i(H,A)=0$ for $0\leq i\leq q-1,$ then the following sequence is exact:

$0\to H^q(G/H,A^H)\xrightarrow{\mathrm{Inf}}H^q(G,A)\xrightarrow{\mathrm{Res}}H^q(H,A).$

**Proof.** 1) $\mathrm{Inf}$ is injective: Suppose that the image of $f:G/H\to A^H$ is $0$ in $H^1(G,A),$ then there exist $a\in A$ such that $\mathrm{Inf}(f):g\mapsto ga-a.$ Note that the value of $\mathrm{Inf}(f)$ depends only on the coset of $g$ in $G/H,$ for any $h\in H$ we have $gha-a=ga-a,$ hence $ha=a$ i.e. $a\in A^H.$

$\mathrm{ker(Res)\subset im(Inf)}$: Suppose that $f:G\to A$ is $0$ in $H^1(H,A)$ under $\mathrm{Res},$ then there exists $a\in A$ such that for all $h\in H,$ $f(h)=ha-a.$ Consider $f\_0:G\to A,g\mapsto ga-a,$ clearly $f\_0=0$ in $H^1(G,A),$ so $\tilde{f}=f-f\_0$ is in the same class with $f.$ Note that $\tilde{f}(h)=0$ for $h\in H,$ we have $\tilde{f}(hg)=\tilde{f}(h)+h\tilde{f}(g)=h\tilde{f}(g).$ Therefore the map $G/H\to A^H, gH\mapsto \tilde{f}(g)$ is well defined whose image under $\mathrm{Inf}$ is exactly $f.$

2) Put $B=\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(\mathbb{Z}[G],A)$ and identify $A$ as a submodule of $B$ via $a\mapsto (g\mapsto ga).$ Put $C=B/A$ and we get an exact sequence

$0\to A\to B\to C\to 0.$

Applying $\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(\mathbb{Z}[H],-)$ on this sequence provides a long exact sequence of cohomology groups. In particular, the sequence

$0\to A^H\to B^H\to C^H\to H^1(H,A)=0$

is exact. Note that $B$ is $G$-coinduced;

$B$ is $H$-coinduced, as $\mathbb{Z}[G]$ is free over $\mathbb{Z}[H]$, so there exist an abelian group $M$ such that $\mathbb{Z}[G]=\mathbb{Z}[H]\otimes\_\mathbb{Z} M$ and $B=\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(\mathbb{Z}[H],\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(M,A))$;

$B^H=\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(\mathbb{Z}[G/H],A)$ is $G/H$-coinduced, by dimension shifting (Prop2.7) we have the commutative diagram

<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsOCxbMCwwLCIwIl0sWzAsMSwiMCJdLFsxLDAsIkhee3EtMX0oRy9ILENeSCkiXSxbMiwwLCJIXntxLTF9KEcsQykiXSxbMywwLCJIXntxLTF9KEgsQykiXSxbMSwxLCJIXnEoRy9ILEFeSCkiXSxbMiwxLCJIXnEoRyxBKSJdLFszLDEsIkhecShILEMpIl0sWzAsMl0sWzIsMywiXFxtYXRocm17SW5mfSJdLFszLDQsIlxcbWF0aHJte1Jlc30iXSxbNSw2LCJcXG1hdGhybXtJbmZ9Il0sWzYsNywiXFxtYXRocm17UmVzfSJdLFsxLDVdLFsyLDVdLFszLDZdLFs0LDddXQ==\&embed" width="903" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;">\</iframe>

The first line is exact by induction and the columns are isomorphisms, so the second line is exact. $\square$


### $\mathrm{Cor}$

**Def.** Suppose that $H$ is of finite index in $G$. For $G$-module $A$ define the norm 
$$\mathrm{N}_{G/H}:A^H\to A^G, a\mapsto \sum_{sH\in G/H}sa.$$



If $G$ is finite, we define $\mathrm{N}\_G=\mathrm{N}\_{G/\{1\}}.$ %$$

Define $\mathrm{N}\_{G/H}$ to be the $0$-th corestriction $\mathrm{Cor}:H^0(H,A)\to H^0(G,A).$ Now we extend this definition to cohomology groups of all dimension. If for all $G$-module $C$ we have defined $\mathrm{Cor}:H^q(H,C)\to H^q(G,C),$ then for all $G$-module $A$, put $B=\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(\mathbb{Z}[G],A)$ and identify $A$ as a submodule of $B$, and put $C=B/A$. Then $0\to A\to B\to C\to 0$ is exact. We define the corestriction of dimension $q+1$ to be the map such that the following diagram commutes.

<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJIXnEoSCxDKSJdLFswLDEsIkhecShHLEMpIl0sWzEsMCwiSF57cSsxfShILEMpIl0sWzEsMSwiSF57cSsxfShHLEMpIl0sWzAsMSwiXFxtYXRocm17Q29yfSJdLFswLDIsIlxcZGVsdGEiXSxbMSwzLCJcXGRlbHRhIl0sWzIsMywiXFxtYXRocm17Q29yfSJdXQ==\&embed" width="466" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;">\</iframe>


**Prop2.14.** The $H^q(G,A)$ endomorphism $\mathrm{Cor\circ Res}$ is equal to multiplication by $[G:H].$

**Proof.** The case $q=0$ is clear, then do it by dimension shifting. $\square$

**Corollary2.15.** If $G$ is finite of order $n$, then $H^q(G,A)$ is a finite group of $n$-torsion.

**Corollary2.16.** If $G$ is finite and $A$ is finitely generated as a $\mathbb{Z}[G]$-module, then $H^q(G,A)$ are finite.

**Proof.** In view of cochains $H^q(G,A)$ are finitely generated of torsion, by the structure theorem of f.g. abelian groups, they are finite. $\square$

## Cup Product


## Tate Cohomology

In this section $G$ is supposed to be finite.

Recall: the norm $N=\sum\_{s\in G}s\in\mathbb{Z}[G].$ We denote $\_N A$ the kernel of $N:A\to A$. The augmentation ideal $I\_G$.

## $p$ -Groups

后面忘了

# Appendix

## E. Right Derived Functors

$R\textbf{-Mod}$ is the category of left $R$-modules, $\textbf{Ab}$ is the category of abelian groups.

> We only cite some results that is needed in the construction of group cohomology here

**LemmaE.1.** An abelian group $G$ is injective iff it is divisible, i.e. $nG=G$ for any $n\in\mathbb{Z}$.

**Proof.** <a href="https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/01D6"> Stacks Project Tag 01D6.</a> $\square$

**LemmaE.2.** In $R\textbf{-Mod}$ all left $R$-module can be embedded into an injective module.

**Proof.** Let $M$ be a left $R$-module. Denote $A$ its underlying abelian group and $(\bigoplus\mathbb{Z})/N$ the presentation of $A.$ Put $G=(\bigoplus\mathbb{Q})/N$, then $G$ is divisible. $M\simeq\mathrm{Hom}\_R(R,M)$ is embedded into $\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(R,G),$ which is injective as $R$-module, as 

$\mathrm{Hom}\_R(-,\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(R,G))=\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(R\otimes\_R -,G)=\mathrm{Hom}\_\mathbb{Z}(-,G).$ $\square$

**CorollaryE.3.** In $R\textbf{-Mod}$ all left $R$-module has an injective resolutiom.

**LemmaE.4.** Let $M,N$ be left $R$-modules with injective resolutions $I\_\bullet, J\_\bullet,$ then a map $f:M\to N$ induces a map between the chain complexes

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMTIsWzEsMCwiTSJdLFsxLDEsIk4iXSxbMiwwLCJJXzAiXSxbMywwLCJJXzEiXSxbNCwwLCJJXzIiXSxbNSwwLCIuLi4iXSxbNSwxLCIuLi4iXSxbNCwxLCJKXzIiXSxbMywxLCJKXzEiXSxbMiwxLCJKXzAiXSxbMCwwLCIwIl0sWzAsMSwiMCJdLFsxMCwwXSxbMCwyXSxbMiwzXSxbMyw0XSxbNCw1XSxbMTEsMV0sWzEsOV0sWzksOF0sWzgsN10sWzcsNl0sWzEwLDExXSxbMCwxLCJcXGFscGhhIl0sWzIsOSwiXFxhbHBoYV8wIl0sWzMsOCwiXFxhbHBoYV8xIl0sWzQsNywiXFxhbHBoYV8yIl1d -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsMTIsWzEsMCwiTSJdLFsxLDEsIk4iXSxbMiwwLCJJXzAiXSxbMywwLCJJXzEiXSxbNCwwLCJJXzIiXSxbNSwwLCIuLi4iXSxbNSwxLCIuLi4iXSxbNCwxLCJKXzIiXSxbMywxLCJKXzEiXSxbMiwxLCJKXzAiXSxbMCwwLCIwIl0sWzAsMSwiMCJdLFsxMCwwXSxbMCwyXSxbMiwzXSxbMyw0XSxbNCw1XSxbMTEsMV0sWzEsOV0sWzksOF0sWzgsN10sWzcsNl0sWzEwLDExXSxbMCwxLCJcXGFscGhhIl0sWzIsOSwiXFxhbHBoYV8wIl0sWzMsOCwiXFxhbHBoYV8xIl0sWzQsNywiXFxhbHBoYV8yIl1d&embed" width="816" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>
It is unique up to homotopy.%$$


Suppose that $F:R\textbf{-Mod}\to\textbf{Ab}$ is an addictive covariant functor. The right derived functor $R^n F$ is defined in the following sense: for any left $R$-modules $M$ and its injective resolusion.

$0\to M\to I\_0\to I\_1\to I\_2\to...$

consider the chain complex (from which we delete $FM$)

$0\to FI\_0\to FI\_1\to FI\_2\to...$

We define $R^nF(M)$ to be 

$$\frac{\mathrm{ker}(FI_n\to FI_{n+1})}{\mathrm{im}(FI_{n-1}\to FI_n)}$$

and the morphisms to be defined by the induced map of LemmaE.4 on the quotient.

It is well defined(M. Scott Osborne, Basic Homological Algebra, pp.126-129).

**LemmaE.5.** If the covariant functor $F$ is left exact, then $R^0F(M)=F(M)$ for left $R$-module $M$. 

**Proof.** Trivial. $\square$

**LemmaE.6.** If the covariant functor $F$ is left exact, then the exact sequence in $R\textbf{-Mod}$ 

$0\to M^\prime\to M\to M^{\prime \prime}\to 0$

give rise to a long exact sequence of $\textbf{Ab}$ 

$0\to R^0FM^\prime \to R^0FM\to R^0FM^{\prime\prime}\to R^1FM^\prime \to R^1FM\to R^1FM^{\prime\prime}\to R^2FM^\prime \to...$

**Proof.** Denote $d:FI\_n\to FI\_{n+1}$ the coboundary map, $Z^n(M)=\mathrm{ker}(FI\_n\to FI\_{n+1})$ and $B^n(M)=\mathrm{im}(FI\_{n-1}\to FI\_n)$. Apply snake lemma to the diagram 

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsOCxbMSwxLCJaXntuKzF9KE1eXFxwcmltZSkiXSxbMiwxLCJaXntuKzF9KE0pIl0sWzMsMSwiWl57bisxfShNXntcXHByaW1lXFxwcmltZX0pIl0sWzEsMCwiRkleXFxwcmltZV9uL0JebihNXlxccHJpbWUpIl0sWzIsMCwiRklfbi9CXm4oTSkiXSxbMywwLCJGSV57XFxwcmltZVxccHJpbWV9X24vQl5uKE1ee1xccHJpbWVcXHByaW1lfSkiXSxbNCwwLCIwIl0sWzAsMSwiMCJdLFszLDAsImQiXSxbNCwxLCJkIl0sWzUsMiwiZCJdLFswLDFdLFszLDRdLFs0LDVdLFsxLDJdLFs1LDZdLFs3LDBdXQ== -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsOCxbMSwxLCJaXntuKzF9KE1eXFxwcmltZSkiXSxbMiwxLCJaXntuKzF9KE0pIl0sWzMsMSwiWl57bisxfShNXntcXHByaW1lXFxwcmltZX0pIl0sWzEsMCwiRkleXFxwcmltZV9uL0JebihNXlxccHJpbWUpIl0sWzIsMCwiRklfbi9CXm4oTSkiXSxbMywwLCJGSV57XFxwcmltZVxccHJpbWV9X24vQl5uKE1ee1xccHJpbWVcXHByaW1lfSkiXSxbNCwwLCIwIl0sWzAsMSwiMCJdLFszLDAsImQiXSxbNCwxLCJkIl0sWzUsMiwiZCJdLFswLDFdLFszLDRdLFs0LDVdLFsxLDJdLFs1LDZdLFs3LDBdXQ==&embed" width="1016" height="304" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>

$\square$
