---
date: 2024-02-01
layout: post
title: BNSNote017 Galois Correspondance, Finite Fields, Profinite Groups
subtitle: Notes on Class Field Theory 01
description: 
image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/XiaoruiYIN/gtiobnsimg/main/img/cftpre0.jpg
optimized_image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/XiaoruiYIN/gtiobnsimg/main/img/cftpre0.jpg
category: Mathematics
tags:
  - Mathematics
  - BNS
author: YXR
math: true
---

> Referrence: 李文威, 代数学引论; 黎景辉, 代数数论; J. -P. Serre, Local Fields.

> Compact = Compact + Hausdorff.

> 我写了一个类域论的前置知识的note, 因为太长了所以决定拆成几个部分发. 这一篇的主要是Galois扩张和Galois对应, 有限域的构造, 以及为了呼应无穷Galois理论的投射有限(profinite)群. 证明都写的非常粗糙不过我个人觉得在此基础上不难补出完整证明. 这个系列(指前置知识)的下一篇目前计划是群上同调, 这几天看着就发了. 再往后可能是关于不可分扩张还有分歧理论的东西, 但是这部分我还没写.

# 1. Galois Correspondance

Let $F$ be an arbitrary field. Fix an algebraic closure $\Omega$ of $F.$ All fields that we shall discuss is considered as a **subset** of $\Omega.$

## Normal & Separable Extensions

**Def.** A field extension $E/F$ is said to be normal if the following equivalent conditions are satisfied:

N1) $f(X)\in F[X]$ has a root in $E$ $\Rightarrow$ $f(X)$ splits in $E;$

N2) there exists $\mathcal{P}\subset F[X]$ such that $E$ is the splitting field of $\mathcal{P};$

N3) For any $f\in\mathrm{Hom}(E,\Omega)$ we have $f(E)=E.$

**Proof.** N1) $\Rightarrow$ N2) Let $\mathcal{P}$ be the set of all the polynomials that has a root in $E.$ 

N2) $\Rightarrow$ N3) The set $S$ consisting of roots of the polynomials in $\mathcal{P}$ generates $E$ over $F,$ and an embedding $E\to\Omega$ is just a permutation over the set $S$. 

N3) $\Rightarrow$ N1) Suppose that $f\in F[X]$ and $x\in E$ such that $f(x)=0.$ Take another root $y\in\Omega$ of $f$ and an automorphism $\sigma$ of $\Omega/F$ that maps $\sigma(x)=y,$ then $y\in \sigma(E)=E.$ $\square$


**Def.** A field extension $E/F$ is said to be separable if all $x\in E$ is separable, i.e. the following equivalent conditions are **false**:

S1) The minimal polynomial of $x$ over $F[X]$ has mutiple roots in $\Omega$;

S2) The derivative of the minimal polynomial of $x$ over $F[X]$ is $0$;

S3) $\mathrm{char}(F)=p>0$ and the minimal polynomial of $x$ over $F[X]$ is in $F[X^p].$

**Proof.** $\square$


**Lemma1.1.** A finite extension $E/F$ is separable $\Leftrightarrow$ $[E:F]= \\# \mathrm{Hom}(E,\Omega).$

**Proof.** Omitted. $\square$

**Lemma1.2.** i) $E/F$ finite separable $\Rightarrow$ all its subextensions are separable;

ii) $E/F$ separable, $L/E$ separable $\Rightarrow$ $L/F$ separable.

**Proof.** $\square$

**Def.** The separable closure of $F$ in $\Omega$ is the maximal separable extension of $F$, denoted by $F^{\mathrm{sep}}.$

**Remark.** $F^{\mathrm{sep}}/F$ is normal, as $F^{\mathrm{sep}}$ is the splitting fields of all the separable polynomials.

**Prop1.3.** $E/F$ finite separable $\Rightarrow$ there exists $x\in E$ s.t. $E=F(x).$

**Proof.** Omitted. $\square$

## Finite Galois Correspondance

**Def.** $E/F$ is said to be a Galois extension if it is normal and separable, $\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)$ is its automorphism group.

**Prop1.4.** If $E/F$ finite Galois then $\\# \mathrm{Gal}(E/F)=[E:F].$

**Proof.** Lemma1.1 $\square$

**Prop1.5.** Let $L,M$ be subfields of $\Omega,$ then 

i) $L/F$ Galois $\Rightarrow$ $LM/M$ Galois;

ii) $L/F$ Galois, $F\subset M\subset L$ $\Rightarrow$ $L/M$ Galois;

iii) $M/F,$ $L/F$ Galois $\Rightarrow$ $L\cap M/F,$ $LM/F$ Galois.

**Proof.** $\square$

**Theorem1.6.** Finite Galois Correspondance.

Suppose that $E/F$ is finite Galois, then we have the bijective correspondance

$$\{K: F\subset K\subset E\}\leftrightarrow\{H: \text{ subgroups of }\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)\}$$

given by $K\mapsto\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)$ and $E^H\mapsfrom H.$ 

> $E^H$ consists of the point of $E$ that fixed by all element of $H$.

**Proof.** We need to show that $K=E^{\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)}$ and $H=\mathrm{Gal}(E/E^H).$ It is clear by definition that $K\subset E^{\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)}$ resp. $H\subset\mathrm{Gal}(E/E^H),$ so we only need to show that the both sides have the same dimension resp. cardinal. 

By Prop1.4 and Prop1.5 we have $ \\# \mathrm{Gal}(E/E^H)=[E:E^H],$ it suffices to show that $\\# H\geq[E:E^H].$ As $E/E^H$ is separable, 
we may take $x\in E$ such that $E^H(x)=E.$ Suppose that the minimal polynomial of $x$ over $E^H[X]$ is $f(X),$ then $f$ splits by normality and $\mathrm{deg}(f)=[E:E^H].$ Note that for all $\sigma\in H$ we have $\tilde{\sigma}(f)=f,$ the roots of $f$ are of the form $(\sigma(x))\_{\sigma\in H}$, in particular $\mathrm{deg}(f)=\text{number of roots}=\\# H.$ $\square$

## Infinite Galois Correspondance

**Lemma1.7.** $E/F$ is Galois, then its subextension $K/F$ is Galois $\Leftrightarrow$ $\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)$ is a normal subgroup of $\mathrm{Gal}(E/F).$

**Proof.** By Lemma1.2 $K/F$ is Galois $\Leftrightarrow$ it is normal. Note that for $\sigma\in\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)$ we have $\sigma\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)\sigma^{-1}=\mathrm{Gal}(E/\sigma(K))$ it follows from (N3) in the definition of normality. $\square$

**Lemma1.8.** Suppose that $E/F$ is Galois and $K/F$ its Galois subextension, then the map given by $\sigma\mapsto\sigma\|\_K$ is a homomorphism $\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)\to\mathrm{Gal}(K/F)$. 

**Proof.** $\square$

**Prop1.9.** Suppose that $E/F$ is Galois and $K/F$ its Galois subextension, then we have a group isomorphism

$$\frac{\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)}{\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)}\simeq\mathrm{Gal}(K/F).$$

**Proof.** Clear by Lemma 1.8. $\square$


**Def.**  Suppose that $E/F$ is a Galois extension, then $\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)$ forms a neiborhood basis of $\mathrm{id}\in\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)$ when $K/F$ runs over all its Galois subextension. The topology defined by this neiborhood basis is called the Krull topology.

**Proof.** This is a neigorhood basis as $\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)\cap\mathrm{Gal}(E/L)=\mathrm{Gal}(E/KL).$ $\square$

**Prop1.10.** We have a $\textbf{TopGrp}$ isomorphism $\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)=\varprojlim \mathrm{Gal}(K/F)$ where $K/F$ runs over all its finite Galois subextension.

**Proof.** Clear by LemmaB.1.  $\square$

**Corollary1.11.** $E/F$ Galois and $K/F$ its subextension, then 

i) $\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)$ is compact;

ii) Open subgroups are closed and of finite index;

iii) $\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)$ is open in $\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)$ if $K/F$ is finite;

iv) $\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)$ is closed in $\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)$.

**Proof.** i) ii) Follows from Prop.B.2.

iii) For all $x\in E$ the group $\mathrm{Stab}(x)$ (under the action of the Galois group) is open for it contains the neiborhood of $\mathrm{id}$ $\mathrm{Gal}(E/L)$, where $L$ is the splitting field of the minimal polynomial of $x$. Suppose that $K=F(x\_1,..,x\_n)$, then $\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)=\bigcap\_{1\leq i\leq n}\mathrm{Stab}(x\_i)$ is open.

iv) As in (iii)  $\mathrm{Stab}(x)$ is open, hence it is closed, and $\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)=\bigcap\_{x\in K}\mathrm{Stab}(x)$ is closed. $\square$

**Theorem1.12.** Galois Correspondance.

Suppose that $E/F$ is Galois, then we have the bijective correspondance

$$\{K: F\subset K\subset E\}\leftrightarrow\{H: \text{ closed subgroups of }\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)\}$$

given by $K\mapsto\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)$ and $E^H\mapsfrom H.$ 

**Proof.** We only need to proof that $\mathrm{Gal}(E/E^H)\subset H.$

Suppose that $\sigma\in\mathrm{Gal}(E/E^H)$ then for any finite subextension $K/F$, we denote the image of $H$ in $\mathrm{Gal}(K/F)$ by $\overline{H}$. By the finite Galois Correspondance we have $\mathrm{Gal}(K/K^{\overline{H}})=\overline{H}$, therefore $\sigma |\_K\in\overline{H}.$ 
By Prop1.9, $H\cap \sigma\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)\neq\varnothing$, i.e. every neiborhood of $\sigma$ meets $H.$ Since $H$ is closed, we deduce that $\sigma\in H.$ $\square$

**Prop1.13.** $E/F$ Galois, then $H$ is an open subgroup of $\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)$ if and only if $E^H/F$ is finite. 

**Proof.** By Corollary1.11(ii), $H=\mathrm{Gal}(E/E^H)$ is of finite index in $\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)$, by Prop1.9

$\\# \mathrm{Gal}(E^H/F)=\frac{ \\# \mathrm{Gal}(E/F)}{ \\# \mathrm{Gal}(E/E^H)}<\infty.$

Hence $[E^H:F]<\infty.$ $\square$

**Prop1.14.** Suppose that $E/F$ is Galois and $K/F$ its Galois subextension, then we have an $\textbf{TopGrp}$ isomorphism

$$\frac{\mathrm{Gal}(E/F)}{\mathrm{Gal}(E/K)}\simeq\mathrm{Gal}(K/F).$$

**Proof.** Clear by the fact that a continuous bijection from a compact space to a hausdorff space is homeomorphism.  $\square$

**Def.** The absolute Galois group $\Gamma\_F$ of a field $F$ is defined to be $\mathrm{Gal}(F^{\mathrm{sep}}/F).$

**Example.** $\Gamma\_{\mathbb{F}\_p}=\hat{\mathbb{Z}}$ (Prop.C.7).




# Appendix


## B. Profinite Groups

> Referrence: Dinakar Ramakrishnan, Robert J. Valenza, Fourier Analysis on Number Fields.

**Def.** A topological group $G$ is said to be profinite if it is a projective limit of some finite groups equipped with the discrete topology.

**LemmaB.1.** In the topological group $G=\varprojlim G\_i$, then $p\_i^{-1}(U\_i)$ forms a neiborhood basis of $1$, where $p\_i:G\to G\_i$ is the natural map and $U\_i$ runs over all open subgroups of $G\_i$.

**Proof.** Follows from definition. $\square$

**PropB.2.** $G$ is profinite $\Leftrightarrow$ $G$ is compact and totally disconnected.

**Proof.** $\Rightarrow$ $G=\varprojlim G\_i$ can be viewed as a closed subgroup of $\prod G\_i$, which is compact by Tychonoff's Theorem.

We denote $G^0$ the component of $1\in G$. For any open subgroup $U$ of $G$, consider $V=\bigcup\_{x\in G^0\backslash U}xU\cap G^0$
, then $V$ is open, $U\cap V=\varnothing$ and $(U\cap G^0) \cup V=G^0$, hence $U\cap G^0=G^0$ i.e. $G^0\subset U$ for any open subgroup $U$ of $G$, by LemmaB.1 $G^0=\{ 1 \}.$

$\Leftarrow$ We claim that $G=\varprojlim G/N$ where $N$ runs over all open normal subgroups of $G$. $G/N$ is finite by the compactness of $G$.

Let $\alpha: G\to\varprojlim G/N$ be the continuous map obtained by the universal property. $\alpha$ is injective, for its kernel is $\bigcap\mathrm{ker}(G\twoheadrightarrow G/N)$. We need to show that $\alpha$ is surjective. As $G$ is compact and $\varprojlim G/N$ is Hausdorff it suffices to show that $\alpha(G)$ is dense in $\varprojlim G/N$. This is clear by LemmaB.1. $\square$

**Remark.** The group $\hat{G}=\varprojlim G/N$ where $N$ runs over all open normal subgroups of finite index of $G$ is called the projective completion of $G$.

**Def.** The Prüfer ring $\hat{\mathbb{Z}}=\varprojlim \mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$.

**PropB.3.** $\hat{Z}=\prod\_p \mathbb{Z}\_p=\mathrm{End}(\mathbb{Q/Z}).$

**Proof.** $\square$


## C. Finite Fields

For a rational prime $p$ denote $\mathbb{F}\_p=\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z}.$ 

**PropC.1.** The cardinal of a finite field is a prime power. 

**Proof.** Trivial. $\square$

**Prop.C.2.** For any $n\in \mathbb{N}$ there exsists a field of $q=p^n$ elements, unique up to isomorphism, denoted by $\mathbb{F}\_q.$

**Proof.** Let $F$ be the splitting field of the polynomial $X^q-X\in\mathbb{F}\_p [X]$ which do not have multiple roots over $\mathbb{F}\_p,$ then $F$ is a finite field of $q$ elements. For the uniqueness, note that all finite fields of $q$ element is the splitting field of $X^q-X.$ $\square$

**PropC.3.** The multiplicative group of a finite field is cyclic.

**Proof.** Let $F$ be a finite field. By the structure theorem of finite abelian groups there exists $x\in F^\times$ of order $d=\mathrm{exp}(F^\times),$ therefore elements of $F^\times$ are roots of the polynomial $X^d-1,$ which implies $\\# F^\times \leq d$ and hence $F^\times$ is cyclic. $\square$

**CorollaryC.4.** The Frobenius automorphism $\mathrm{Frob}\_q: x\mapsto x^q$ is indeed an automorphism over $\mathbb{F}\_q$.

**PropC.5.** All algebraic extension of finite field is separable.

**Proof.** Suppose that $E/F$ is an algebraic extension with $\mathrm{char}(F)=p$. If $x\in E$ is not separable, then by the definition (S3)  its minimal polynomial $f(X)\in F[X^p].$ By Corollary.C.4 there exists $g(X)\in F[X]$ such that $f=g^p,$ then $g(x)=0$ and $\mathrm{deg}(g)<\mathrm{deg}(f),$ a contradiction. $\square$

**Remark.** In the same way one can proof a more general result: A field of character $p$ is perfect(i.e. all its algebraic extension is separable) if and only if the Frobenius endomorphism $x\mapsto x^p$ is an automorphism.

As a result, we get that the separable closure of a finite field is exactly its algebraic closure, and that finite extensions of finite fields are always Galois extensions.

**CorollaryC.6.** $\mathrm{Gal}(\mathbb{F}\_{q^n}/\mathbb{F}\_q)\simeq \mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ via $\mathrm{Frob}\_q\mapsto 1+n\mathbb{Z}.$

**PropC.7.** $\Gamma\_{\mathbb{F}\_q}=\overline{\mathbb{Z}}.$

**Proof.** The following diagram commutes for $m\|n.$

<!-- https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhybXtHYWx9KFxcbWF0aGJie0Z9IF8ge3Febn0vXFxtYXRoYmJ7Rn0gXyBxKSJdLFswLDIsIlxcbWF0aGJie1p9L25cXG1hdGhiYntafSJdLFsyLDAsIlxcbWF0aHJte0dhbH0oXFxtYXRoYmJ7Rn0gXyB7cV5tfS9cXG1hdGhiYntGfSBfIHEpIl0sWzIsMiwiXFxtYXRoYmJ7Wn0vbVxcbWF0aGJie1p9Il0sWzAsMSwiXFxtYXRocm17RnJvYn1fcVxcbWFwc3RvMStuXFxtYXRoYmJ7Wn0iXSxbMiwzLCJcXG1hdGhybXtGcm9ifV9xXFxtYXBzdG8xK21cXG1hdGhiYntafSJdLFsxLDMsIlxcdGV4dHttb2QgfW0iXSxbMCwyLCJcXHNpZ21hXFxtYXBzdG9cXHNpZ21hfF97XFxtYXRoYmJ7Rn1fe3FebX19Il1d -->
<iframe class="quiver-embed" src="https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJcXG1hdGhybXtHYWx9KFxcbWF0aGJie0Z9IF8ge3Febn0vXFxtYXRoYmJ7Rn0gXyBxKSJdLFswLDIsIlxcbWF0aGJie1p9L25cXG1hdGhiYntafSJdLFsyLDAsIlxcbWF0aHJte0dhbH0oXFxtYXRoYmJ7Rn0gXyB7cV5tfS9cXG1hdGhiYntGfSBfIHEpIl0sWzIsMiwiXFxtYXRoYmJ7Wn0vbVxcbWF0aGJie1p9Il0sWzAsMSwiXFxtYXRocm17RnJvYn1fcVxcbWFwc3RvMStuXFxtYXRoYmJ7Wn0iXSxbMiwzLCJcXG1hdGhybXtGcm9ifV9xXFxtYXBzdG8xK21cXG1hdGhiYntafSJdLFsxLDMsIlxcdGV4dHttb2QgfW0iXSxbMCwyLCJcXHNpZ21hXFxtYXBzdG9cXHNpZ21hfF97XFxtYXRoYmJ7Rn1fe3FebX19Il1d&embed" width="631" height="432" style="border-radius: 8px; border: none;"></iframe>


$\square$
